# 6. Direct execution

## 6.1 Basic Technique: Limited Direct Execution

To make a program run as fast as one might expect, not surprisingly OS developers came up with a technique, which we call **limited direct execution**. The “direct execution” part of the idea is simple: just run the program directly on the CPU.

This approach gives rise to a few problems in our quest to virtualize the CPU. The first is simple: if we just run a program, how can the OS make sure the program doesn’t do anything that we don’t want it to do, while still running it efficiently? The second: when we are running a process, how does the operating system stop it from running and switch to another process, thus implementing the time sharing we require to virtualize the CPU?

## 6.2 Problem 1: Restricted Operations

A process must be able to perform I/O and some other restricted operations, but without giving the process complete control over the system. How can the OS and hardware work together to do so?

The approach we take is to introduce a new processor mode, known as **user mode**; code that runs in user mode is restricted in what it can do. For example, when running in user mode, a process can’t issue I/O requests; doing so would result in the processor raising an exception; the OS would then likely kill the process.

In contrast to user mode is **kernel mode**, which the operating system (or kernel) runs in. In this mode, code that runs can do what it likes, including privileged operations such as issuing I/O requests and executing all types of restricted instructions.

What should a user process do when it wishes to perform some kind of privileged operation, such as reading from disk? To enable this, virtually all modern hardware provides the ability for user programs to perform a **system call.** System calls allow the kernel to carefully expose certain key pieces of functionality to user programs, such as accessing the file system, creating and destroying processes, communicating with other processes, and allocating more memory.

To execute a system call, a program must execute a special **trap** instruction. This instruction simultaneously jumps into the kernel and raises the privilege level to kernel mode; once in the kernel, the system can now perform whatever privileged operations are needed (if allowed), and thus do the required work for the calling process. When finished, the OS calls a special **return-from-trap** instruction, which, as you might expect, returns into the calling user program while simultaneously reducing the privilege level back to user mode.

The hardware needs to be a bit careful when executing a trap, in that it must make sure to save enough of the caller’s registers in order to be able to return correctly when the OS issues the return-from-trap instruction. On x86, for example, the processor will push the program counter, flags, and a few other registers onto a per-process kernel stack; the return-from-trap will pop these values off the stack and resume execution of the user mode program.

There is one important detail left out of this discussion: how does the trap know which code to run inside the OS?

The kernel does so by setting up a **trap table** at boot time. When the machine boots up, it does so in privileged (kernel) mode, and thus is free to configure machine hardware as need be. One of the first things the OS thus does is to tell the hardware what code to run when certain exceptional events occur. For example, what code should run when a hard disk interrupt takes place, when a keyboard interrupt occurs, or when a program makes a system call? The OS informs the hardware of the locations of these **trap handlers**, usually with some kind of special instruction. Once the hardware is informed, it remembers the location of these handlers until the machine is next rebooted, and thus the hardware knows what to do (i.e., what code to jump to) when system calls and other exceptional events take place.

To specify the exact system call, a **system-call number** is usually assigned to each system call. The user code is thus responsible for placing the desired system-call number in a register or at a specified location on the stack; the OS, when handling the system call inside the trap handler, examines this number, ensures it is valid, and, if it is, executes the corresponding code. This level of indirection serves as a form of **protection**; user code cannot specify an exact address to jump to, but rather must request a particular service via number.

There are two phases in the limited direct execution (LDE) protocol. In the first (at boot time), the kernel initializes the trap table, and the CPU remembers its location for subsequent use. The kernel does so via a privileged instruction (all privileged instructions are highlighted in bold). In the second (when running a process), the kernel sets up a few things (e.g., allocating a node on the process list, allocating memory) before using a return-from-trap instruction to start the execution of the process; this switches the CPU to user mode and begins running the process. When the process wishes to issue a system call, it traps back into the OS, which handles it and once again returns control via a return-from-trap to the process. The process then completes its work, and returns from main(); this usually will return into some stub code which will properly exit the program (say, by calling the exit() system call, which traps into the OS). At this point, the OS cleans up and we are done.

## Problem 2: Switching between processes

How can the operating system regain control of the CPU so that it can switch between processes?

**A Cooperative Approach: Wait For System Calls**

In this style, the OS trusts the processes of the system to behave reasonably. Processes that run for too long are assumed to periodically give up the CPU so that the OS can decide to run some other task. Most processes transfer control of the CPU to the OS quite frequently by making system calls. Applications also transfer control to the OS when they do something illegal.

**A Non-Cooperative Approach: The OS Takes Control**

The answer turns out to be simple and was discovered by a number of people building computer systems many years ago: a **timer interrupt.**

A timer device can be programmed to raise an interrupt every so many milliseconds; when the interrupt is raised, the currently running process is halted, and a pre-configured **interrupt handler** in the OS runs. At this point, the OS has regained control of the CPU, and thus can do what it pleases: stop the current process, and start a different one.

**Saving and Restoring Context**

The OS has to make a decision: whether to continue running the currently-running process, or switch to a different one. This decision is made by a part of the operating system known as the **scheduler.**

If the decision is made to switch, the OS then executes a low-level piece of code which we refer to as a **context switch**. A context switch is conceptually simple: all the OS has to do is save a few register values for the currently-executing process (onto its kernel stack, for example) and restore a few for the soon-to-be-executing process (from its kernel stack).

## 6.5 Summary

* The CPU should support at least two modes of execution: a restricted **user mode** and a privileged (non-restricted) **kernel mode**.
* Typical user applications run in user mode, and use a **system call** to **trap** into the kernel to request operating system services.
* The trap instruction saves register state carefully, changes the hardware status to kernel mode, and jumps into the OS to a pre-specified destination: the **trap table**.
* When the OS finishes servicing a system call, it returns to the user program via another special **return-from-trap** instruction, which reduces privilege and returns control to the instruction after the trap that jumped into the OS.
* The trap tables must be set up by the OS at boot time, and make sure that they cannot be readily modified by user programs. All of this is part of the **limited direct execution** protocol which runs programs efficiently but without loss of OS control.
* Once a program is running, the OS must use hardware mechanisms to ensure the user program does not run forever, namely the **timer interrupt**. This approach is a **non-cooperative** approach to CPU scheduling.
* Sometimes the OS, during a timer interrupt or system call, might wish to switch from running the current process to a different one, a low-level technique known as a **context switch**.
